### Back to the Hospital, 7 August 2019

Well, the simple trip to the hospital to get some blood work done quickly
changed to hospitalization. My white blood cell count was out of control
indicating some massive infection. Not knowing what kind it was, they did a
urine and blood culture to detect the type and loaded me up with a wide
reaching palette of antibiotics.

![ER](class:rounded:img-fluid:img/cancer/IMG_0810.jpg)

My body did not take these antibiotics very kindly and nausea/vomiting
started almost immediately. My mental state went downhill quickly as the
memories from the first hospitalization were still very fresh. It was
frustrating, especially since the hospital did not have a room ready. I
told my wife to go home (waiting was torture for her as well) and they
finally transferred me from the emergency room to a hospital bed at 3:00 AM.

Given that they could not rule out the need for emergency surgery, I was
once again put on a water only diet. Another flashback I could have done
without.

On the second day they continued the hunt for the infection source and
finally they found that I had a nasty bacterial infection in my intestines
called [Clostridium difficile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clostridioides_difficile_infection)
or C. Diff for short. This is some really nasty stuff and I was put in
isolation and on some very strong antibiotics. Isolation in this case meant
that I could not leave my hospital room and everybody coming into my room
had to wear a hazmat gown and gloves (including all visitors). Everything
brought into the room had to stay there or be wiped off with chlorine after
leaving the room.

![Nicole's visit](class:rounded:img-fluid:img/cancer/IMG_0815.jpg)

The cocktail of antibiotics did a real number on me as it completely
destroyed all good bacteria and I was nauseated for a number of days. I hit
a really deep low one night and I even got scared. Here I was sick to my
stomach with a raging fever, high white blood cell count and feeling more
miserable than at any other point during this journey. Was I going to be
one of those statistics that did well during the original surgery but would
later succumb to post-op complications? It was a lonely night and it took
every ounce of remaining energy to talk some sense into myself. Clearly if
things were as bad as I thought, I would be on an intensive care unit.
Finally I calmed down and managed to get some sleep.

I again got upset with the medical staff as they were keeping me in the
dark as to what the plan was. Did they even have one or did they think I
was too stupid to understand? All of this happened on a weekend were
hospitals operate in slow motion and the people on duty don't want to be
there. The best example was the urologist on duty that weekend. If I had
not chosen to go with the robotic assisted surgery, this doctor would have
been my surgeon. Initially I was happy with him showing up as he had done
the most cystectomies in the region. My opinion changed quickly however as
he was arrogant, never listened to me and constantly interrupted me. He
never answered my questions and it was clear he did not want to be there.
At one point I thought he might even be vindictive as I did not pick him as
my surgeon and went with a younger, less experienced team. For what it's
worth, at least he confirmed I did the right thing. I could not imagine
having him as my physician.

Luckily on Monday morning, the stars aligned as the urology resident on
duty was the same lady who observed my surgery and was very helpful during
my first hospital stay. My surgeon had also come back from a week of
vacation and the two finally answered my questions and came up with a plan.
To my great surprise they released me from the hospital that day as my
vital signs and white blood cell count were back to normal. The "only"
antibiotic I was taking was oral so I could continue that at home and my
diarrhea was under control. The news made this grown man cry and I could
see light at the end of the tunnel again. I did however lose another five
pounds in the process.

So one last point on isolation. Despite all the precautions I mentioned
before, the food delivery staff never suited up before coming into my room
and even worse, I don't think they took any precautions with my tray (which
I clearly touched) when they picked it up. And they are the people that
literally go to every hospital bed. What a loophole. It was almost as
comical as the housekeeping staff that did suit up but only cleaned around
objects. My bed side table for instance would only be cleaned were open
spaces were visible. Not a single object on the table was lifted in the
cleaning process. What a joke. No wonder hospitals are bacterial exchange
programs and I'm assuming I picked up my bacteria during my first hospital
stay.

### The Effect of Antibiotics, 20 August 2019

Most of us have seen a few rounds of antibiotics in our lives and I can not
recall ever feeling an effect or suffering side effects. I was therefore
completely shocked how much I suffered during the antibiotic treatment for
this C. Diff infection.

Dry mouth, out of whack taste buds, metallic taste in my mouth, upset
stomach, nausea, vomiting, lack of appetite, zero energy, fast weight loss
and poor blood circulation in toes and fingers. It was terrible and I must
say that the side effects of these antibiotics were worse than those of
chemotherapy.

After I came home, I had to take the antibiotics for another eight days and
it was a struggle. On two occasions just taking the pill would cause
vomiting and in the end I lost another ten pounds. My total weight loss
since the morning of surgery was 22 pounds (over a 3 week period). No
wonder I'm feeling weak.

In contrast to the chemotherapy however, my body recovered quickly and
three day after taking the last antibiotics, I could feel a turnaround.
Weight loss had stopped and I had regained some appetite. My taste buds are
not back to normal yet but hopefully that won't be too long.

I think I can honestly say that this bacterial infection and the antibiotic
treatment were the hardest part of my journey so far. For it to come at a
time that I thought I was climbing my way out of hell, it was soul
destroying to be sent straight back.

### Finally Some Good News, 21 August 2019

Today I met with my surgeon to remove my stents and to hear the results of
my biopsies. Stent removal was a non-event and the biopsy results were
extremely positive.

All (dead) cancer cells were contained in the badder and the cancer had not
spread into my prostate. Even better news was that the 21 lymph nodes
removed during surgery were totally clean. Based on the CT scan, they
already thought this but until they do a biopsy of the parts removed, they
can't know for sure.

This was a major relief as my body is now cancer free after surgery even
though nobody will say this. I can now start the real journey to recovery
and one day call myself a cancer survivor.

I've seen the highway to hell, I've been on the highway through hell and I
even made a U-turn back to hell. I'm now looking forward to continuing my
journey on the highway out of hell and never return.

### Not so Fast, 6 September 2019

Today, I visited the oncologist who explained that my urologist was a
little too optimistic. My biopsy had revealed that some cancer cells made
it into the blood vessel bundles that were attached to the bladder although
there was no evidence that they made it into the blood stream or any other
part of my body. I now have to do a CT scan every three months for two
years to ensure nothing pops up.

### Infection Number 2, 12 November 2019

I ended up with a massive infection that required hospitalization. This
time it was a kidney infection caused by a narrowing in my left ureter
which caused my kidney to pool urine. My body responded quickly to the
antibiotics and I recovered within a few days. Unfortunately, tests proved
that my kidney function was not right and that this urethral stricture
would have to be dealt with as it was likely to cause future infections.

### Family Emergency, Late November 2019

My mother-in-law has been in poor health for the last couple of months and
my wife and I had decided to go to the Netherlands in December to see her
one more time. Given that I was a ticking time bomb for another infection,
I agreed with my urologist that I would take antibiotics with me and
postpone surgery to fix my ureter until after the trip.

### Death in the Family, December 2019

By the time we got to the Netherlands, my mother-in-law had deteriorated so
badly that she was now in a hospice. We decided to extend our trip for one
week and she died in my wife’s arms during the night when she had the
watch. We were able to attend the funeral and came back on Christmas Eve.
My body behaved perfectly and we couldn’t have scripted this sad event any
better. When there’s an ocean between you and your parents, end-of-life
situations are very hard. Two of our parents died of catastrophic events
(one a massive heart attach and the other of a stroke), one died of
pancreatic cancer and the last of old age. We were very grateful that we
could be there for at least one of them.

### Six Month CT scan, 2 January 2020

My regular oncology CT  scan was clean so at least that news was good.

### Infection Number 3, 10 January 2020

My luck ran out and I was once again hospitalized for a kidney infection.
This time my fever was 104 with a heart rate of 160 at rest when I walked
into the Emergency Room and I almost ended up on the cardiology department.
Antibiotics worked well again but this time they also installed a
nephrostomy tube to better drain my left kidney.

A [nephrostomy tube](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nephrostomy) is a
catheter (a thin tube). It is put in through your skin and into your kidney
to drain your urine. Typically you need a nephrostomy tube when something
is blocking your normal flow of urine from your kidney. The bad part is
that this tube empties into another bag so I ended up with two bags for a
while.

Luckily, the radiologist that installed the nephrostomy tube saw my
discomfort and smithed the regular nephrostomy to a retrograde nephrostomy.
That type drains internally and basically because like a “stent” between
the kidney and the bladder (in my case the ileal conduit). This allowed to
bypass the stricture and lower the risk of infection.

### Trying to fix the Stricture, 24 Jan 2020

My urologist went in to try and fix my ureter with a laser scarring and
angioplasty-like balloon technique to open up my ureter. This procedure has
a low chance of success but it is not invasive so we agreed it should be
tried before more drastic surgery was pursued.

He was very nervous about what he found and I think he believed the
narrowing of the ureter was caused by escaped cancer. Luckily,
the biopsy revealed that this was not the case so it was “just” a chronic
infection caused by that stricture.

At the same time, my retrograde nephrostomy was removed and replaced by a “wider” stent to keep the ureter open while the scared tissue healed. In
the end, I had no pain and there was no noticeable side effects.

### Infection number 4, 5 March 2020

I had another UTI (luckily no hospitalization required this time) but the
CT scan showed that the surgery to fix the stricture had not worked. They
now have to go back in and cut the bad piece out. Step one will be another
temporary nephrostomy tube and step two full be major surgery to fix the
ureter.

The nephrostomy tube was the regular type with a tube sticking out of your
back but they added the retrograde part so it would drain internally. This
way I did not require a second bag but I had a tube with port sicking out
of my back.

### Oncology CT Scan, 3 April 2020

COVID-19 is really disrupting routine medical procedures. Luckily,
emergency procedures and treatment for cancer patients are still allowed
so I could do my regular CT body scan. It came back negative so fingers
crossed, it looks like the cancer is gone (for now).

My Oncologist explained that I will keep doing these scans regularly for
two years after which they are done annually. After two years, there is a
95% probability that the cancer will not return.

### The waiting Game, 6 April 2020

I now know that the ureteral stricture has to be removed and this will be
major surgery. Unfortunately, due to COVID-19 restrictions, this procedure
can’t be performed and I will have to wait until the government allows
these procedures to be restarted.

My urologist tells me that once they start back up, I will be priority 2
out of 3 as the people who need cancer removal will have to go first. Based
on current projections, it’s likely June before they start and my turn will
not be before July.

So the only choice I have right now is to keep nephrostomy tubes to
minimize the chance of infections. These tubes have to be replaces on a
regular basis and even that is hard to schedule. Luckily my radiologist is
very good at using the words emergency and life threatening so he was able
to get me in for a replacement.

This was a remarkable experience since I never saw another patient at the
hospital that day. Parking lot and all waiting rooms were completely empty
so it all went very fast. I guess there are positive side effect to
COVID-19. As this was outpatient, I’ve was back home on opioids in no time.

### Swelling around my Nephrostomy Tube, 6 May 2020

The exit wound of my nephrostomy tube started to look angry. After texting
a picture to my urologist, he did not want this to develop into another
infection so he contacted the radiologist to have the tube replaced. Yet
again, they cleverly used terms like urgent and life threatening to
convince the hospital to allow the procedure while under COVID-19 lockdown.

![nephrostomy tube](class:rounded:img-fluid:img/cancer/IMG_0429.jpg)

The procedure went well and it was over in 30 minutes. Again the hospital
was a ghost town and I never saw another patient. The other good thing was
that the radiologist installed a retrograde nephrostomy tube which is fully
internal. No more exist wounds on my back as this tube (stent) has to stay
there until I can finally schedule my surgery.

### Finally, It can be Scheduled, 19 June 2020

Today, I got the phone call from the urology group that it’s finally my
turn to get scheduled for major surgery to fix my ureter by cutting out the
bad part. Surgery is scheduled for August 12th and it will take 4 to 5
hours (ouch).

The same surgeons that performed the first surgery will conduct this one as
well and again they’ll be assisted by the Da Vinci robot. I’m really
looking forward to get this done and restart a normal life.

### Resignation, 30 June 2020

After an 18 month ordeal where I’ve tried a professional come back at least
5 times, I’ve come to the conclusion that it’s time for me to make some
serious life changes and focus on the more important things.

Once you're away from a workplace for this long, many things happen and you
start to feel like an outsider. Things you’ve created have been replaced,
procedures have become more bureaucratic and most importantly, tribal
alliances have morphed. For a while, I was ready to address the large
number of issues I faced but eventually I came to the conclusion that I no
longer had the energy to set it all straight again.

So i’ve decided to retire on December 31st after a 40 year career in a very
complex international environment. By the time all my medical issues are
solved, I’ve undergone a two year journey and I now want to focus on my
family and myself.
