### Decision Time, 20 June 2019

When I found out that my bladder cancer was at stage 2, I knew that my
bladder had to be removed and some form of reconstruction/urinary diversion
had to take place. Earlier in this blog I mentioned that I quickly came to
the conclusion that I wanted a replacement bladder called a neobladder made
out of a part of my intestines. This was a very comfortable notion as it
gave my the sensation that my future life wasn't much different from my
previous life.

Given that a hard decision was not required until now, I really didn't
think about it much until a few weeks ago when I seriously looked at the
pros and cons of the three possible options. Guess what; the decision
wasn't as easy as I thought, and in the end, I decided to do the exact
opposite of what I thought I would do.

The reason for this flip/flop is actually pretty simple. Initially, I only
looked at the perceived pros of the solutions and did not factor in the
cons nor possible risks. This created an unbalanced perspective that made
me draw the wrong conclusions. On the other hand, believing this
unrealistic future served me well during the last couple of months as it
never weighed on me during those terrible chemo cycles.

So now it was time to come back to planet earth and look at the whole
situation realistically. For those who care, here is my thought process:

Option 1 is the neobladder, where a segment of small bowel is used to
create a reservoir for urine. The ureters (tubes that connect the kidneys
to the bladder) are attached to the reservoir which is ultimately attached
to the urethra (tube that takes urine from your bladder to the outside).
You use the neobladder to store urine and you urinate either with the help
of a catheter or by bearing down to push the urine out with abdominal
pressure.

Initially this sounded appealing to me as you simply had to learn to use
different muscles to urinate. Almost business as usual. Well, it's not that
simple. The neobladder has no nerves in it so you have no idea how full it
is. You therefore have to urinate on the clock every three to four hours,
day and night. Initially this has to be done through self-catheterization
as you still need to learn the proper muscle technique. Given the scar
tissue in my urethra caused by previous surgeries, this could be painful
and difficult. You might even have to self-catheterize for the rest of your
life if your neobladder doesn't empty properly. Finally, there is a risk of
lifetime leakage requiring you to wear diapers.

Adding all of this up, the neobladder is not as appealing as I initially
thought. Sticking something up my penis at least six times a day with a
risk of infection, dealing with my scar tissue, living on a four hour clock
with sleep deprivation and still face the risk of having to wear a diaper
did not sound like business as usual, and I quickly lost interest in this
solution.

Option 2 is the Indiana pouch where a part of the colon is used to store
the urine on the inside of your body. This pouch has a channel brought out
to the skin somewhere in the belly area that must be catheterized to empty
the reservoir.

This option is similar to the neobladder but has the advantage that you
don't catheterize through the penis. It does however have the same
disadvantage that you have to live on the clock and it has similar
infection risks.

Option 3 is the ileal conduit where a short segment of bowel is isolated
with one end attached to the ureters and the other end brought through a
small opening, or stoma, in the abdominal wall. You then have a pouch on
the outside that collects the urine as it drains out of the stoma.

Initially I was dead set against this option as it was obviously going to
change my appearance and I thought this option would require the most work.
It turned out I did not inform myself properly and the medical urostomy
ecosystem is offering some very clever and practical solutions that
simplify this option.

First of all, a urostomy pouch is very flat and unless you wear very skinny
cloths, people are not going to see it. You can even swim with it and most
swimwear (no, not a speedo) will cover the bag. Secondly, a urostomy bag
needs to be replaced every two to four days which is not a great burden.
Determining whether the bag is full is easy as it is on the outside of your
body and emptying it is as simple as opening and closing a valve. Thirdly,
you can cascade the pouch on your belly to a bigger bag so you don't even
have to get up during the night. For long road trips or visits to the
Munich Oktoberfest, you can cascade to a leg bag. The other 50-plussers
will be impressed that you only have to go to the bathroom once for every
five or more of their trips. Lastly, you never have to catheterize yourself
and the risks of infections is significantly reduced.

So once I got over the stigma of a pouch on my belly, and used quality of
life to judge the pros and cons of the three options, it quickly became
clear to me that the ileal conduit with urostomy pouch would be my best
solution.

### Pre-op Meeting with Surgeon, 26 June 2019

Today, I had my Pre-op meeting with my bladder removal surgeon. I discussed
my reconstruction decision making with him to see if I covered all the
angles. I think he was impressed that I had done so much research and
confirmed all my findings. So now it's final: I'm going with option 3, an
ileal conduit with urostomy pouch as a way of dealing with urine for the
rest of my life.

My surgeon also confirmed that he had solicited the help of a colleague to
help him during the long procedure estimated to take between six and eight
hours. The second surgeon is also in his early thirties, trained on the Da
Vinci robotic system, specializes in urological oncology and the two have
done many of these procedures together. I felt very comfortable being in
the hands of this team.

Everything is a "go" now and I still have one month to strengthen,
overthink the procedure and if really necessary, get nervous about it.

### Another UTI, 12 July 2019

With less than two weeks to go until the big surgery, I'm having a lot of
discomfort urinating again. True to form, I got another Urinary Tract
Infection (UTI) for which I have to take antibiotics. On one side, it is
miserable to go through this again but on the other side, it confirms that
my current urinary plumbing is simply not good anymore.

My entire day is now focussed on (preventative) bathroom trips as I have
little time to go to the bathroom when the urge comes. The is especially
hard when you're about town and you're going from the Virgina heat into
over air-conditioned spaces and back. This UTI is actually making me look
forward to my big surgery to remove half the urinary tract and get a
simpler life.

The other good news I'm deriving from this is that my decision not to go
with a neobladder is the right one. Having to rely on potentially
problematic parts of the old plumbing for years to come does not sound
appealing to me.

This UTI and its timing is probably more of a blessing than a curse. It
confirms decisions made and it makes me look forward to a time where
planning to go to the bathroom does not dominate my life day and night.

### End of an Era, 25 July 2019

For weeks I've been thinking about the day before the big surgery. On one
hand it is the end of an era as I will never again urinate like I've done
for 59 years but on the other hand, it's the start of a new and improved
life where the inconveniences (and pain) of the last 12 months will be gone.

The emotional person in me really struggled with this end of an era idea
and I tried desperately not to focus on "this is the last time I do this,
or this is the last time I do that". So to deal with this, I tried to keep
a brave and optimistic external persona while not letting the whole thing
get to me on the inside.

Luckily, my wife and children let me get away with the external persona so
the final day before surgery wasn't too bad. We even went for a big
"lunner" (a family tradition for when we eat a big meal between lunch and
dinner). It was a very enjoyable event as the Virgina humidity was very low
that day and we had our meal outside on a terrace.

### The Big Surgery, 26 July 2019

Against all expectations, I slept well the night before my surgery. We had
to get up early as I had to report to the hospital for a 5:30 AM check-in
and a 7:30 AM surgery time. The good news about the early start was that
there was no traffic and parking was simple.

I actually surprised myself a bit that morning. I was completely calm, no
anxiety and no nervousness. To a certain extend, I was relieved that the
big day was finally there. Once we got to the hospital, check-in was
painless and within half an hour I was in the pre-op area. After a last
trip to the bathroom (yes, the historic moment happened in the hospital),
changing into one of those sexy hospital outfits and getting hooked up to
all machines, I entered a final "hurry up and wait" period for over an
hour. Luckily, my dear wife was allowed to be with me and I was completely
at ease over what was about to happen.

I met with both of my surgeons, my anesthesiologist and a urology resident
of the hospital. All of them said the right things and give me the right
vibes. I could not have asked for a better team. Academically brilliant,
young enough to be robot assisted whizkids, old enough to have done it a
bunch of times and not arrogant enough yet where they did not care about
the patient anymore. I picked the right team.

After a little delay, it was time to wheel me into the operating room and
get the process started. Saying goodbye to my wife and telling her how much
I loved her was the hardest part of the day. I'm glad they knocked me out
quickly as I was really overcome by emotions. On my way to the operating
table, I did see my friend the DaVinci robot and the consoles the surgeons
use to control the machine. It looked very space age and the techno geek in
me would have liked a tour. The last thing I remember is seeing 8:05 AM on
the clock before I started my long sleep.

My wife went home and the hospital did a remarkable job keeping her
informed. On a regular bases, my wife got text messages and phone calls
from an operating room nurse so she was always fully informed about the
progress. I thought that was a remarkable service.

Around 3:00 PM my wife was told the surgery had been successfully completed
and that I was in recovery. Initially, we were told that the first recovery
would be in an intensive care unit but apparently, the surgery went so well
that this was not required. I had suffered minimal blood loss, and my
respiratory system and heart function were completely stable during and
after surgery.

My wife was also called by my surgeon who was very positive about how the
procedure went. It took a little longer than expected but he was very
satisfied. Those surgery days have to be grueling for these guys as they
have to be in the hospital 2 hours before, perform a 7 hour surgery without
a break and then have to do the post-op. I'm very impressed.

![room](class:rounded:img-fluid:img/cancer/IMG_0805.jpg)

I regained consciousness around 5:00 PM and felt completely comfortable. No
pain, no nausea, just very tired and sleepy. I assume they put a bunch of
strong pain killers in me but I was feeling really good. It took a while
before they figured out my hospital room but eventually, I was moved to my
room at 7:00 PM.

![before/after](class:rounded:img-fluid:img/cancer/IMG_0800.jpg)

I don't remember much of that evening but seeing my darling wife who was
waiting in my room made my day. Everybody has a guardian angel in their
life and she is certainly mine.

### Recovery in the Hospital, 26 July 2019

The day after the surgery started pretty good. I was comfortable, the
discomfort was limited and early indications were that I was on track for a
speedy recovery. I was quickly moved from a water only to a liquid food
diet and the visit by my wife and kids was great.

![family visit](class:rounded:img-fluid:img/cancer/IMG_0806.jpg)

One of the "fun" parts was that I was hooked to a patient controlled
morphine dispenser. Every time I felt discomfort, I could press a button
and 30 seconds later I was in a very happy place. The whole thing was
controlled by a computer that ensured I could not overdose. So for most
of the day I was on a different planet.

That evening I had my second liquid meal and all of a sudden I started to
get terrible nausea that lasted for days. The first reaction of the
hospital was to treat the symptoms. If you are nauseated, you get anti
nausea medication. That did not improve the situation and I believe it
actually made it worse. They also decided to put me back on a water only
diet.

For 48 hours I was miserable. Nobody knew what was going on and the
hospital departments were blaming each other. Urology said it was a side
effect of anesthetics, The anesthesiology group blamed the antibiotics and
others blamed the magnesium supplements or the pain killers. What really
frustrated me was that everybody had an answer for the symptoms but nobody
wanted to look for the root cause.

The analyst in me got really upset and decided that I would do the root
cause analysis myself by eliminating medications. First I stopped using the
morphine and all other pain medications. I ended up with some discomfort
but it was manageable. Secondly I refused medications that were treating
side effects. In the end, I discovered that the culprit was the medication
to restart my intestines.

During my surgery, a part of my intestines were used for the new urinary
diversion. Apparently your intestinal system "falls asleep" after this kind
of surgery and it needs something to kickstart it again. Once they changed
that medication, the nausea went away and I ended three days of throwing up.

In the end I was on a water only diet for five days and lost eight pounds.
With the new medication, my intestinal function started quickly and I was
moved to real food. Recovery accelerated quickly and after a torturous six
days, I was released and could start my recovery at home.

### Coming Home, 1 August 2019

Coming home was fantastic. I was clearly weakened by the surgery and the
starvation diet but I was euphoric to be done with it all. My first full
day home I had some visitors and they were very impressed that I could move
around and have a conversation for a while.

With perfect hindsight, it must have been the euphoria and adrenaline that
got me through the first day since the following days were a lot harder and
I slowly started to deteriorate. I became more tired and was constantly
cold. I had little to no appetite and it was a struggle to focus on
anything. Within a few days I was a TV watching zombie again that did not
absorb anything and I assume I was a concern to my family.

Finally after a few days I decided to measure my temperature and it was
climbing quickly. Eventually it hit 102 Fahrenheit and we called the
urologist. As always, these things happen after hours but I got a callback
quickly. The doctor on call happened to be the person who performed my
first biopsy and he was very helpful. He recommended I go to the emergency
room in the hospital where my surgery was performed and get some blood work
done. The reason he recommended that hospital is that it's the only one in
the area where all medical disciplines are in the building 24/7.
